Israel bombs gaza's hospitals attacking
an already crumbling Health Service
their place is protected by
international law where hundreds of
thousands of Palestinians have sought
shelter what is the state of gaza's
health care System ravaged by Siege and
War this is Inside
[Music]
Story
hello again I'm James Bay there are
limits to War as defined by
international law such as the protection
of hospitals and places of Refuge these
have had no apparent effect on Israel's
Onslaught in Gaza early on news of
hospitals being attacked prompted
widespread International outrage with
Israel accused of war crimes yet more
and more hospitals have been targeted
other health services have been hit to
ambulances bombed for example repeated
attacks on the same place rules out the
possibility of accidental strikes all
this has further battered a health
system crumbling after years of blockade
and War what fuse stocks of medicine and
basic supplies that remain are dwindling
so how can Palestinians get treatment in
such dire circumstances and how do
medical staff cope we'll be discussing
all that in a few moments with our panel
of guests but first hanim Mahmud reports
from KH Unis in southern
Gaza well Stark Dreadful and incapable
or as the Israeli media Outlets describe
it it's a war to end all the wars but so
far Israel is using it sophisticated
attack Jets and heavy artilleries
destroying residential homes hospitals
schools and public facilities creating a
tsunami of casualties and killing
thousand of
civilians so far Palestinians are asking
a question
how many should die before Israel stop
this blood bath Han
mm
City for inside his
story on Friday and Saturday the Israeli
Army intensified its bombardment of
hospitals everyone from medical workers
on the ground to the World Health
Organization is warning it's putting
hundreds of thousands of lives at risk
Alexandra bers
explains to start with 16 of gaza's 35
hospitals or nearly half are no longer
functioning and the casualties are
mounting every minute those still
operating are overcrowded and doctors
say conditions are catastrophic two of
the biggest the Indonesian hospital and
alifa are at risk of running out of
power gaza's only cancer hospital was
also attacked and suspended operations
after it ran out of fuel basic supplies
are hard to come by Dr have had to use
vinegar as a disinfectant screws and
sewing needles others perform surgeries
in crowded corridors without anesthetic
the health Ministry has warned babies
and incubators are at eminent risk in
addition to the patient seeking medical
treatment displaced families have turned
to hospitals for safety and shelter
hundreds of thousands of Palestinians
are camping out in the surrounding areas
and so far Israel has bombed at least
five hospitals the health Ministry says
more than 130 medical staff have been
killed and at least 25 ambulances
targeted since the beginning of Israel's
war on Gaza deliberately targeting
Medical Teams and hospitals is a
violation of the Geneva conventions and
the Palestine red crescent society says
Israel's actions could amount to war
[Music]
crimes for more now let's bring in our
panel of guests in Gaza City with we
have Dr Ahmed mol laati the head of the
plastic surgery department at the alifa
hospital it's the biggest medical
complex in Gaza and was targeted
recently in Israeli strike in rala nebal
fasak a spokeswoman for the Palestinian
red Cresent society and in Alexandria
and Egypt it's mads Gilbert who heads
the emergency department at the
University Hospital of North Norway he's
also a professor of medicine who's
worked in Gaza for many years including
in the 2014 War thank you all of you for
joining us I think we should start by
going to Dr Ahmed there in the shifa
hospital uh you are an Irish Palestinian
uh surgeon who is there on the ground in
Gaza City um you have seen many things
in the past gaz's had four Wars before
this one but did you ever think you'd
see a situation as bad as
this so thanks for for having us
actually it's my first war in Gaza yes I
moved to Gaza last February from London
I was in S Thomas Hospital uh but what
have everyone described here is this is
one of the worst they have ever seen
this horrible
situation uh the the the atmosphere here
is there is no safe place at all there
is no one safe at all there is no way
that we see any any light by the end of
this tunnel so there is there there is
nothing we can expect would improve the
current situation in hospital which is
700 bit capacity in the first few hours
we received more than a thousand
casualities in this Hospital what's
happening now all the hospital uh beds
are full patients are on the ground they
are all over crowded we have more than
50,000 people in shifa hospital uh
refugees or just evacuating in sha
Hospital assuming it's one of the safest
places the weapons they have used are
totally different from the old ones I'm
a burn surgeon I deal with burn patients
the kind of bur and the depth of bur
we've seen is is totally different you
can see this fly this part of the very
crowded place that everything is let me
say not that sip aseptic there is no way
that you keep can keep anything clean in
this hospital so back the burns are
really severe extensive burn and you
keep the bride in cleaning the burn and
then in a few days you get again deeper
layers of burn so uh the whole system I
I think it's collapsing or it's
collapsed already because when you have
hospitals full icus are full theaters
half of the theaters are functioning
only because the patients are crowded in
the recovery rooms uh the supplies we
get uh has almost finished what we got
As in the last few days is is very
minimal for what we need what we consume
in Gaza now in one day is more than what
we used to consume in a month time so we
are running out of everything
electricity now we work on in sh
Hospital which the main hospital in the
secondary smaller generator where many
departments they they don't have
electricity they don't have lights maybe
here I'm in a theater theaters and ICU
are still running as well as the
emergency department but we are at what
at any point at the risk of running out
of the fuel the water you hardly get
water we we had really difficulties
getting good drinking water or natural
drinking water the one we drink is very
weird taste for that we don't know where
it's coming from there is no mineral
water remained in Gaza at the current
time for the
Dr ahed let me just interrupt you there
Dr Ahmed let me just interrupt you there
because on top of all of this uh we had
on the afternoon of the 3rd of November
an attack on a convoy of ambulances that
were going to take people to Rafa for
medical care in Egypt um when they left
alifa and then they came back to alifa
because they came under attack and the
Very hospital that you're in right now
came under attack
yes exactly you know what happened
yesterday exactly that uh the shifa
hospital is overcloud we have more than
2,000 patients now in the hospital and
thanks to the Egyptian they approved to
get us uh less than 100 patients to be
evacuated to Egypt so the icrc and the
UN everyone refused to arrange for these
patient transport as where the
international law and then we found no
way here to get the patients transported
from shifa hospital to raah borders so
from the middle of Gaza to the south of
Gaza so the ministry after a few days of
waiting has decided that we will move
this group of ambulances and we will
inform everyone that these ambulance
will move at this certain time from
shifa hospital through Rashid which is
the beach the main Coastal Road uh down
to Rafa borders and they informed
everyone what happened they start moving
from shifa hospital in two or three
minutes time in ansar roundabout they
just uh bombed the first ambulance and
then the holy group decided to go back
to shifa hospital when they arrived to
shifa entrance they bumbed another
hospital another ambulance and we got at
least 15 people killed in that attack
and 7 where were where were you at the
time Dr Ahmed where were you at the
time I was really lucky 10 minutes
before the attack I was there at the
entrance trying to find something to eat
so it's the entrance of the hospital
it's more of a small Market where
everyone try to get something to eat
there so there are like food
street food there there are many shops
with with selling you know few things
not shops like small places to buy
something so I went there trying to find
something to eat I was there with two of
my colleagues 10 minutes before the
attack and we're super lucky you know
that you just we got Escape that one
because when they bumped that place it's
super super crowded I think we were
lucky that the strike happened between
an ambulance and another car otherwise
the shr would have killed at least two
or 300 people it's super crowded there
and what we believe this is chipa
hospital this is part of chipa hospital
it's it's the entrance of chipa Hospital
which assumed to be one of the safest
places for the people here nebal you are
from the Palestinian red crescent it was
your ambulances that were bombed let me
just tell you what the Israeli military
said they say it was an air strike on an
ambulance being used by Hamas and a
number of Hamas terrorist terrorist
operatives their words were killed your
reaction our reaction was happened
yesterday was um a war crime
intentionally targeting a group of
ambulances while they were trying to
conduct their humanitarian role
transporting critically injured patients
to go to Rafa through Rafa to go to get
treatment uh in Egypt unfortunately as
the doctor said we were only in our way
hering towards the South to transport
the wounded people we were five
ambulance es one of all of them for the
Ministry of Health one of them is for
the Palestine red Cresent and during
that time due to a block a a blockade on
the street because of the bombardment we
had to return around and then when we
are returning around in AR Rashid Street
the first bombardment took a place which
um Target the Palestine uh the Ministry
of Health ambulance and then we were
continued towards aifp
when the second bombardment happened uh
and um it has resulted to the damage of
the Palestine ricent ambulance as well
as two colleagues were critically
injured what um Israel is saying is just
a justification for multiple attacks
against medical missions and Medical
Teams this should not be
acceptable the healthare Workers Health
Care personnel as well as health care
facilities should be Pro protected
according to the international
humanitarian law up to this moment the
Palestine Crescent have lost eight
ambulances went out of service due to a
bombardment from Israel occupation
forces most importantly we have lost
four colleagues who were killed while
they were trying to conduct their life
saving Mission trying to save other
people's life at least 21 other um 21
other colleagues were injured while also
trying to save other people's life this
is um unacceptable it's just horrifying
to see healthc care workers should risk
their life in order to save other
people's life while according to the
international humanitarian law health
care facilities and Personnel should be
protected we are let me bring let me
bring in let me bring in Dr mads now and
I don't want to spend all of the
discussion assessing Israeli claims um
because we could do that and I think we
need to concentrate on this on the
situation the D situation
in Gaza but I am going to bring up one
because it's persistent and that is the
claim that the alifa hospital where Dr
armad is right now and you know it very
well Dr mads is the main Hamas command
and Control Center built underneath that
hospital let's just address that because
they keep bringing that
up uh thank you and I'd like first to
express my deepest respect for the work
that Dr Ahmed and the nurses the
paramedics and all the volunteers are
doing in the in the hospitals in gasa in
North Gaza in particular and in ch in
particular they are enormously
courageous they have been working night
and day for more than three weeks now
and it is under the most challenging and
dangerous circumstances they stand tall
beneath their patients they don't leave
their patients the conditions are
horrible they are getting sick
themselves the water is absent the
brackish water is used electricity is
gone to be a work
a health worker under these conditions
with um you know 2,000 patients and then
being attacked it is a burden it is such
a situation that these people deserve
over deepest respect now to the claims
uh from Israel that shifa is a Hamas
Command Center first time we heard this
was in 2009 and it's been repeated ever
since so they had all these years 16
years to to prove it there is absolutely
no proof and um I have been walking
freely all over shifa I was working in
Shiva shifa during the attack in 2009
and 12 and 14 I take pictures I film I
write books I do research on shifa U
I've never seen this commanders or this
Command Center and had I seen it I would
not have worked there because I work
according to the Geneva Convention so I
I urge the Israeli propaganda people to
show the proof
my understanding of these allegations is
that they want to take the media
attention away from the main problem
namely namely the massacres of civilians
and the attack on healthc care so the
journalist will ask again and again and
again like yesterday they say oh these
were Hamas ambulances without any proof
so these constant lies has the function
the political function of taking the
media attention away from the main
course which well you're right so let's
take the immediate attention back to
actually what's going on on the ground
in Gaza with Dr Ahmed and just looking
at the problems you're facing there in
your hospital I don't really know where
to start the lack of medical staff the
fact that so many Hospitals and Clinics
have been bombed or closed the lack of
medicine the lack of surgical supplies
The Limited water the fuel that's
running out but let's start with with
with doctors and nurses I mean how
overworked are you because I assume some
of the doctors and nurses have been
killed or
injured so so just to start with you
know we're working in totally unsafe
atmosphere and and the whole situation
is that no one knows where to go to be
safe or where to keep their families
safe and being in a shifa hospital we
assume that this is the safest place but
it's the most like threatened place to
be bombed and just coming to the big
massacre at the AL Hospital which is at
Sher hospital we thought that would be
the last place to be bombed in Gaza
being a hospital f and being a church
hospital and 150 years old hospital with
the refer with their reference in in UK
but what happened that there is no place
which can be protected so uh I think the
numbers of the uh Medical Professional
skills are more than 100 35 were killed
more than 20 uh ambulances were uh
bombed or just you know uh stried so
what we feel there is no place which is
safe and don't forget we have our
families we have our people so what
happened to me that most of my family
are in UK and Ireland so I live alone
here H I have to bring my family my two
my three kids and my pregnant wife to my
office here in a small closed place and
we mainly mainly have the uh the cans or
the noodles to be our main food we
hardly get fresh food once every three
or four days we get big challenges to
get water so what happened now I work
with only 30% capacity of our health
professionals it's not only me it's all
the whole hospital and if you go there
you see just yesterday I got only two
doctors with me who have to see 200
patients under our list and we have to
operate for at least 10 cases per day so
the whole situation is collapsing the
people are worried we have our plastic
Sergeant Dr mam who got killed on I
think the day 10 of the attack when he
went to go and have some rest in his
house we got uh like just this morning
one of our doctors his brother is a very
in a very critical situation in the in
the middle of Gaza where he thought it's
like a safer place to evacuate so he
would not be able to function you know
greatly one of our cleaners the main
cleaner his father uh was killed like
three weeks ago and then he continued
the same day and he's the main cleaner
who stayed with us yesterday his cousin
was killed as well just he stopped for
one or two hours then you have no time
to stop so the whole personnel has been
you know just suffering and we work with
not more than 30% of our capacity
regarding the equipments as as a burn
surgeon I run out of the blades used for
skin gra and I have to I found a box of
old things what we called humpy knife
which used to be the main knives used in
the 70s or 60s uh and they are my my
main knives now which I was never
trained to use them now so you run
whatever you run out of it will not come
back the amount of consumables we use
are really too much when you go to the
hospital you will find the emergency
department is full of I I think 250
injured patients on the ground in the
corridors there is no place the
evacuated people with very bad situation
where you are afraid of endemics I have
been having flu for the last two weeks
you know cuffing and having runny nose
for two three days then cuffing you
don't know what's happening it's never a
healthy atmosphere to work in you will
find the flies in the hospital you can't
keep the St atmosphere in the hospital
because of the gush of cases you get
imagine the emergency department of CH
Hospital who has to deal with 300
casualties at one point which already
full we have the red area the green zone
and all this stuff the the red zone now
is full they hardly can get two bits
free for the critical red zone is the
intensive care of the emergency
department where we receive the critical
patients it's full now with patients we
can't keep the patients you know to take
their care so we put them in the ground
we start working on them the anesthesia
medications they are not as needed we
have very little of these things the
fuel will run out at one point I don't
know why the people are looking at this
this is a war crime this is a genocide
you can't imagine you know when
earthquake happened everyone would run
just trying to help the people to
evacuate the patients okay let me bring
in let me bring in let me bring in Dr Dr
mads now um Dr mads you are in Egypt
you're trying to get to Gaza if you're
given per permission to go in there um
you have been in the alifa hospital many
many times before you've been in that
hospital when it's been at War but do
you recognize the conditions that you're
hearing here the fact they're having to
treat people not in beds but are lying
on Floors I've heard that in some um
places in Gaza doctors are actually
using vinegar to disinfect
wounds well it's always been very hard
to work in shifa during bombardment
because it is so insecure and limited as
Dr Ahmed is telling but what we see now
is unprecedented I have never ever seen
anything like it and I think his
description is very precise there is
barely space on the ground to place
patients I mean we've had to put two
operating tables in one room we've had
crowded places in the Ws but this is
beyond anything we have seen before and
when you add to that the lack of fuel we
know that yesterday they had to stop the
oxygen machines that makes oxygen the
concentrators they had to stop the
sterilizing machines and they had to
turn off the air condition for the morch
where the where the dead ones are in
addition to to not having water and
supplies this is a manmade extremely
evil situation first you bomb the
civilians you injure them then you take
them to hospital and you bomb the
hospital and you deny the
internationally protected people who
take care of our wounded uh brothers and
sisters whoever they are they deny them
the tools and the supplies they need to
treat and to rescue people and don't
forget that the majority of these
patients are children among the 25,000
in there are 7 and a 12,000 children and
many of the ones that Dr adid are
talking about the burns are children so
this is not an earthquake this is all
manmade it's meant to be like this
because the occupiers the Israeli Army
have turned off through the siege of
Gaza the water and the fuel and the and
electricity and they've turned off the
uh medical supplies and we who want to
come in Waiting in Egypt to come in are
not allowed in so this can I bring you
in on the issue can I bring you in in on
the issue of fuel I mean fuel is running
out there's not very much left how
worried are you of fuel running out
completely because Israel's not allowing
it in and what will then
happen we are completely worri regarding
running out of a fuel we have already
three palent ambulances were stopped
because running out of gasoline the
situation in our hospital is also
catastrophic as highlighted we are
running shortages of medical supplies
and medicine and most importantly fuel
now all hospitals in Gaza have turned
into not only a place for wounded people
and patients they are a shelter for
thousands of civilians we are uh under
intense bombardments the Palestine
redent run alz hospital alotz hospital
for the past days have been under
intense bombardments that is taking
place all over the hospital which has
resulted to complete damage of most
building in the surrounding area of the
hospital as well as a severe damage for
the building at least 42
civilians those who are internally
displaced and they are they sought
Refugee inside the hospital most of them
are children and women Dr Ahmed um we've
talked about fuel there's also
apparently according to the UN only 5%
of gaza's water needs currently being
met how worried are you that there could
be an even worse well compounding
everything we've got um even more bad
things coming in in terms of disease I
see one official from the IC icrc saying
there's a risk of chera diarrhea
Hepatitis A and typhoid around the
corner listen I've been in in a strictly
let me say uh aseptic uh places during
my work before moving here and when I
moved here I was trying to the same
thing what's happening now you can't
keep these aseptic sterile conditions at
all so the corridors are full of people
even the stairs the streets tents the
bathrooms are really busy with like
loads of people waiting for their so the
personal hygiene will be very low
because of the lack of water lack of
places to get shower or just to clean
yourself and then the food and the
places so what's happening now it's the
best area to get all these colera or
pandemics things to happen and it will
happen at any point I'm telling you
flies are filling the hospital you will
see worms in all the wounds very strange
you know very like FK let me say like a
lot a lot of patients with worms coming
out of the wounds it's disgusting to see
that I've seen one of the patient with
40% burn who I was doing dressing for
the patient daily and then he was full
of worms I brought the patient to the
theater we watched the room the patient
for more than one and a half hour shower
with all atic things we use vinegar we
use the soup we use the washing what
whatever you find there we use because
we run out of the usual things and I I
put sugar as well on most of the wounds
so I use everything I mean the patient
at 10:00 in the evening the next day
10:00 in the morning the patient was
Again full of worms the situation is you
know is really horrible here I don't
know what the people are waiting for
they are killing the people as they said
they should go to South South is safe
they killed them on their way they said
go to South it's safe they bombed there
in South in the UN schools now in the
hospital everyone feels that it's unsafe
but the people will use it as shelters
here so it's full of patients it's full
of people it's totally aseptic it's it's
totally septic places it's totally
crowded places can I ask you very very
briefly what would be your one message
to the International Community right now
from Sha Hospital in Gaza City the kids
we see the children we have seen we have
been killed in Gaza and not allowed to
get the treatment as well and we the
basic the basic right of anyone in a
catastrophe is to get support from the
people outside the medical health
professionals are you know we are
collapsing we are really tired we can't
tolerate more and more it's it's almost
a month now for me I've been in the
hospital for the whole of a month I can
see the people they can hardly work with
these circumstances we we are thinking
that someone should come and stop this
thing and at least we should have
support what we believe in everyone
should at least help us to evacuate the
patient to get more Health you know
doctors nurses to support us in what we
do what we Face here is like killing us
slowly we know the mortality rate is
very high for all the patient we can't
give them Best Care the care we provide
to the patient is very minimal because
the equipments are not there the
consumers are not work we are really
exhausted we are tired I think the
system is collapsing it's almost
collapsing we feel we are still strong
we are fighting we are Fighters the G
are known for being Fighters the doctors
we will not not leave leave the patients
but the situation is catastrophic
everyone should stand there and stop
this genocide they should stop what's
happening to the health system to the
people to the kids simply what's behind
each child is a sad story I can tell you
70% of the relatives who are coming with
the V are not first degree relatives I
will ask the how are you related you
will not get you know sister or mother
or father they would say like you know
the whole family was wiped up and we got
only you know I am the cousin I'm the
far cousin of the kids so what we see
here is horrible sometimes I prefer not
to ask about the details not to ask
about what's behind the story of this CH
I just operate on and just carry on
because if you keep asking you can't
continue operating and working in this
catastrophic places so everyone should
just stand up and say this is this is a
war crime this genocide this has to be
stopped Dr Ahmed thank you very much a
very harrowing discussion but thanks to
all our guests Dr mads Gilbert Nebel
farac and in Gaza City Dr Ahmed aati
please stay safe to you if you want to
see this or any of our other programs
again at any time you can you'll find
them at al.com we'd like to hear your
views too on the war on Gaza post them
on Facebook
facebook.com AJ insidestory on or on X
that's what many people still know as
Twitter you'll find us AJ insid story
from me and the team in Doha thanks for
watching bye-bye for
[Music]
now